.TH LOHIGH 1 "December 2025" "lohigh 3.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lohigh \- DJ Sacabambaspis lets you take lofi on the go
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lohigh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I input_file1.wav input_file2.wav output_file.wav
.br
.B lohigh
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I input_file.wav output_file.wav
.br
.B lohigh
.B \-\-batch
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I file1.wav file2.wav ...
.br
.B lohigh
.B \-\-playlist=\fIFILE\fR
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.I output_file.wav
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lohigh
is a simple command-line tool for creating lofi music by combining audio files with optional ambient sounds. It supports crossfading, volume normalization, and batch processing while maintaining a minimalist, single-purpose design.
.PP
DJ Sacabambaspis helps you transform any audio into lofi with professional-quality output and a playful personality.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS "Audio Processing"
.TP
.B \-\-fade=\fISECONDS\fR
Apply crossfade between audio files. Eliminates clicks and pops at transitions.
Example: \fB\-\-fade=1.5\fR
.TP
.B \-\-level=\fILEVEL\fR
Normalize audio to target peak level (0.0 to 1.0). Default is 0.8 (80%).
Example: \fB\-\-level=0.9\fR
.TP
.B \-\-no\-normalize
Disable automatic volume normalization, preserving original audio levels.
.TP
.B \-\-loop=\fIN\fR
Repeat the first input file N times before mixing. Useful for extending short ambient loops.
Example: \fB\-\-loop=3\fR
.TP
.B \-\-ambient=\fINAME\fR
Choose which ambient file to use. Built-in options: \fBambient\fR (default), \fBvinyl\fR, \fBrain\fR, \fBcafe\fR, \fBnight\fR, or \fBrandom\fR.
You can also specify a custom file path. Use \fB\-\-list\-ambients\fR to see available files.
Example: \fB\-\-ambient=vinyl\fR
.TP
.B \-\-list\-ambients
List all available ambient files and exit. Shows which ambient options are currently available.
.SS "Workflow & UX"
.TP
.B \-\-force
Overwrite output file if it already exists. By default, lohigh refuses to overwrite existing files.
.TP
.B \-\-reverse
Swap the order of input files. Places your content before the ambient sound instead of after.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Show detailed processing information including normalization levels and crossfade details.
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-quiet
Suppress all output except errors. Useful for scripts and automation.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Output results in JSON format for machine-readable parsing. Automatically enables quiet mode.
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be done without actually processing files. Displays file metadata and estimated output.
.TP
.B \-\-preview=\fISECONDS\fR
Process only the first N seconds of each file. Useful for quick experimentation.
Example: \fB\-\-preview=30\fR
.SS "Batch Processing"
.TP
.B \-\-batch
Enable batch processing mode. Mix multiple files with the default ambient sound.
.TP
.B \-\-output\-dir=\fIDIR\fR
Specify output directory for batch mode. Creates directory if it doesn't exist. Default is current directory.
Example: \fB\-\-output\-dir=./lofi_mixes/\fR
.TP
.B \-\-shuffle
Randomize file order for creative, serendipitous mixing. Works in batch and playlist modes.
.SS "Playlist Mode"
.TP
.B \-\-playlist=\fIFILE\fR
Process files listed in a playlist file. Supports plain text (one path per line) and .m3u format.
Files are combined sequentially with crossfade between each.
Example: \fB\-\-playlist=myfiles.txt\fR
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS "Basic Usage"
Mix any audio file with the built-in ambient sound:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh podcast.wav podcast_lofi.wav
.RE
.fi
.PP
Combine two specific audio files:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh melody.wav beat.wav combined.wav
.RE
.fi
.SS "Professional Mixing"
Apply crossfade and custom normalization:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh track1.wav track2.wav output.wav \\
    \-\-fade=2.0 \-\-level=0.85
.RE
.fi
.SS "Batch Processing"
Process an entire music library:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh \-\-batch *.wav \\
    \-\-output\-dir=./lofi_versions/ \\
    \-\-fade=1.5 \-\-level=0.8
.RE
.fi
.SS "Playlist Mode"
Create a mix from a playlist file:
.PP
.nf
.RS
echo "intro.wav" > playlist.txt
echo "main.wav" >> playlist.txt
echo "outro.wav" >> playlist.txt

lohigh \-\-playlist=playlist.txt final_mix.wav \\
    \-\-fade=1.5
.RE
.fi
.SS "Creative Workflows"
Choose different ambient sounds:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Use vinyl crackle
lohigh input.wav output.wav \-\-ambient=vinyl

# Random ambient each time
lohigh \-\-batch *.wav \-\-ambient=random \-\-output\-dir=./mixed/

# See what's available
lohigh \-\-list\-ambients
.RE
.fi
.PP
Extend short ambient loops:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh ambient_loop.wav content.wav output.wav \\
    \-\-loop=5 \-\-fade=2.0
.RE
.fi
.PP
Randomize mixing order for creative discovery:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh \-\-batch samples/*.wav \\
    \-\-shuffle \-\-output\-dir=./random_mixes/
.RE
.fi
.SS "Scripting & Automation"
Use JSON output for integration:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh input.wav output.wav \-\-json > result.json

# Parse with jq
cat result.json | jq '.status'
.RE
.fi
.PP
Quick preview before processing large files:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lohigh large_file.wav test.wav \-\-preview=30 \-\-fade=1.5
.RE
.fi
.SS "Unix Pipelines (stdin/stdout)"
Use \fB\-\fR to represent stdin or stdout for Unix pipeline integration:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Read from stdin, write to stdout
cat input.wav | lohigh \- \- > output.wav

# Read file, write to stdout
lohigh input.wav \- > output.wav

# Read from stdin, write to file
cat input.wav | lohigh \- output.wav

# Pipe through multiple commands
ffmpeg \-i input.mp3 \-f wav \- | \\
    lohigh \- \- | \\
    ffmpeg \-i \- output.mp3
.RE
.fi
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ../asset/ambient.wav
Default ambient sound file used when processing a single input file.
.TP
.I ~/.lohighrc
Optional user configuration file. Settings in this file are used as defaults and can be overridden by command line arguments.
.PP
Example ~/.lohighrc:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Audio defaults
fade=1.5
level=0.8
loop=1

# Workflow
force=false
output\-dir=./lofi_mixes/
.RE
.fi
.PP
Priority: command line args > config file > built-in defaults
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success. Audio processing completed without errors.
.TP
.B 1
Failure. An error occurred during processing. Check error messages for details.
.SH AUDIO COMPATIBILITY
.B lohigh
works with WAV (PCM) audio files. Both input files must have:
.PP
.RS
\- Matching sample rates (e.g., both 44100 Hz)
.br
\- Matching channel counts (both mono or both stereo)
.br
\- 16-bit depth recommended (24/32-bit may work)
.RE
.PP
For other formats (MP3, FLAC, OGG), convert using ffmpeg:
.PP
.nf
.RS
ffmpeg \-i input.mp3 \-ar 44100 \-ac 2 output.wav
.RE
.fi
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/gongahkia/lohigh/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Created with love by the lohigh community and DJ Sacabambaspis.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ffmpeg (1),
.BR sox (1)
.PP
Full documentation and examples:
.br
https://github.com/gongahkia/lohigh
.PP
.B CHANGELOG.md
\- Version history
.br
.B CONTRIBUTING.md
\- Contribution guidelines
.br
.B TROUBLESHOOTING.md
\- Common issues and solutions
.br
.B examples/
\- Usage examples and creative workflows
